RESOLVED

-- 1. THE MAIN STUFF --

a) Learn the Dutch book arguments for probability theory, utility theory, Bayes theorem -- link them to financial arbitrage and think of an "algorithmic generalization thereof".

b) Think: a perfectly rational agent "controlling" a boundedly rational agent, learning through it etc.

c) Intelligence is ... capacity for arbitrary self-improvement? programs as choices?

d) Write down the BR algorithm exactly.

-- 2. LOGIC STUFF --

a) Figure out the precise connection between computer science and model theory. 

   i) Algorithmic reachability, what an agent can realistically know
   ii) Formalizing ideas of "what we know" and "what we can talk about"
   iii) "Function we can't compute" vs. "Theorem we can't prove" X(w)

b) Special cases:

   i) Godel, logical uncertainty, model theory of discovery algorithms
   ii) TOE, X(w)
   iii) C-T thesis, strong computability hypothesis
   iv) Prisoner's dilemma and the argument for (correlated) equilibrium
   v) RCT/pseudo-randomness/unbiased
   vi) Turing completeness of agents, intelligence
   vii) "Algorithmic" foundation of mathematics

-- 3. BACKGROUND AND LIT REVIEW --

a) Read Cenry, Correlated Equilibrium

b) Write "connections between BR and MD"

   0) Obviously, a full theory of MD requires BR
   i) Not being exploitable/no-arbitrage
   ii) Centrality of complexity
   iii) Bayes rationality leads to correlated equilibrium, bounded rationality leads to equilibrium calculation algorithm?
   iii) BR can be modeled as markets (?) 
   iv) Zero-intelligence leads still to efficiency
   v) Godel's incompleteness and Market pricing inefficiency for "YES if NO" asset
   vi) Turing completeness and Arrow completeness

c) Read: 

   i) Singh et al, Subramanian et al
   ii) ACT-R/EPIC/SOAR
   iii) Halpern
   iv) Golbeck to understand Rub/Pap
   v) MIRI on self-modification

d) Write proper lit-review saying things like -- 

   i) alternate understanding of a program, everything is BR
   ii) what is the measure of intelligence?
   iii) Aspects people have looked at in the past:
        - finite automata
        - information lack
   iv) As-if just pushes things down the road.
   v) Dismissing it as an approx dismisses the richness of phenomena
   vi) Logical uncertainty etc. yes ideally we'd be unbeatable Dutch but